What, are Ancient Pistol and youfriends yet?
For my part, I care not.
I say little,
but when time shall serve,
there shall be smiles.
But that shall be as it may.
I dare not fight,
but I will wink and hold outmine iron.
It is a simple one, but what,though?
It will toast cheese,
and it will endure cold asanother man's sword will,
and there's an end.
I will bestow a breakfast tomake you two friends,
and we'll be, all three, swornbrothers to France.
Let it be so, good Corporal Nym.
Faith, I will live so long as Imay,
that's the certain of it,
and when I cannot live anylonger,
I will do as I may.
That is my rest.
That is the rendezvous of it.
It is certain he is married toNell Quickly,
and certainly, she did youwrong,
for you was trothplight to her.
I cannot tell.
Things must be as they may.
Men may sleep,
and they may have their throatsabout them
at that time,
and some say knives have edges.
It must be as it may.
Though patience be a tired mare,yet she will plod.
There must be conclusions.
Well, I cannot tell.
How now, mine host, Pistol.
Base tike, call'st thou me host?
Now, by this hand, I scorn theterm.
Nor will my Nell keep lodgers.
No, by my troth,
for we cannot lodge or board
a dozen or 14 gentlewomen
that live honestly by the prickof their needles,
but it will be thought we keep abawdy house straight.
Ha!
Oh, well a day, Lady, if he benot drawn.
Now we shall see wilful adulteryand murder committed.
Good Lieutenant!
Good Corporal!
Offer nothing here.
Pish!
Pish for thee, Iceland dog,
thou prick-eared cur of Iceland.
Good Corporal Nym, show thyvalor.
Put up your sword!
Hear me!
Hear me what I say!
He that strikes the firststroke,
I'll run him up to the hilts, asI am a soldier.
An oath of mickle might,
and fury will abate.
Mine host Pistol, you must cometo my master,
and you, hostess.
He is very sick and would tobed.
Good Bardolph, put thy facebetween his sheets,
and do the office of a warmingpan.
Away, you rogue.
Faith, he's very ill.
By my troth,
he'll yield the crow a puddingone of these days.
The king has killed his heart.
Come, shall I make you friends?
We must to France together.
Why the devil should we keepknives
to cut one another's throats?
Let floods o'erswell and fiendsfor food howl on.
You'll pay me the 8 shillings Iwon of you at betting.
Base is a slave that pays.
That now I will have.
That's the humor of it.
As manhood shall compound.
Push home!
By this sword,
he that makes the first thrust,I'll kill him.
By this sword, I will.
A sword is an oath,
and oaths must have theircourse.
Corporal Nym, an thou wilt befriends,
be friends!
An thou wilt not, why, then, beenemies with me too.
Prithee, put up.
I shall have my 8 shillings Iwon of you at betting?
A noble shalt thou have andpresent pay,
and liquor likewise will I giveto thee,
and friendship shall combine andbrotherhood.
I shall live by Nym,
and Nym shall live by me.
Is not that just?
For I shall sutler be unto thecamp,
and profits will accrue.
Give me thy hand.
I shall have my noble.
In cash most justly paid.
Well, then, that's the humorof't.
As ever you come of women, comein quickly to Sir John.
Ah, poor heart.
He is so shaked of a burningquotidian tertian
'tis most lamentable to behold.
Sweet men, come to him.
The king hath run bad humors onthe knight.
That's the even of it.
Nym, thou hast spoke the right.
His heart is fracted andcorroborate.
The king is a good king,
but it must be as it may.
He passes some humors andcareers.
Let us condole the knight,
for, lambkins, we will live.
'Fore God, His Grace is bold totrust such traitors.
They shall be apprehended by andby.
How smooth and even they do bearthemselves,
as if allegiance in their bosoms
sat crowned with faith andconstant loyalty!
Shh.
The king hath note of all thatthey intend
by interception which they dreamnot of.
Nay, but the man that was hisbedfellow,
whom he hath dulled and cloyedwith gracious favors--
that he should, for a foreignpurse,
so sell his sovereign's life todeath and treachery.
Now sits the wind fair, and wewill aboard.
My Lord of Cambridge and my kindLord of Masham
and you, my gentle knight,
give me your thoughts.
Think you not that the powers webear with us
will cut their passage throughthe force of France,
doing the execution and the act
for which we have in headassembled them?
No doubt, my liege, if each mando his best.
I doubt not that, since we arewell persuaded
we carry not a heart with usfrom hence
that grows not in a fair consentwith ours
nor leave not one behind
that doth not wish success andconquest
to attend on us.
Never was monarch
better feared and loved than isYour Majesty.
There's not, I think, a subject
that sits in heart grief anduneasiness
under the sweet shade of yourgovernment.
True.
Those that were your father'senemies
have steeped their galls inhoney
and do serve you
with hearts create of duty andof zeal.
We therefore have great cause ofthankfulness
and shall forget the office ofour hand
sooner than quittance of desertand merit
according to the weight andworthiness.
So service shall with steeledsinews toil,
and labor shall refresh itselfwith hope
to do Your Grace incessantservices.
We judge no less.
Uncle of Exeter,
enlarge the man committedyesterday
that railed against our person.
We consider it was excess ofwine
that set him on,
and on his more advice, wepardon him.
That's mercy, but too muchsecurity.
Let him be punished, sovereign,
lest example breed, by hissufferance,
more of such a kind.
Oh, let us yet be merciful.
So may Your Highness, and yetpunish too.
Sir, you show great mercy if yougive him life
after the taste of muchcorrection.
Alas, your too much love andcare of me
are heavy orisons 'gainst thispoor wretch.
If little faults, proceeding ondistemper,
shall not be winked at,
how shall we stretch our eyewhen capital crimes,
chewed, swallowed, and digested,
appear before us?
We'll yet enlarge that man,
though Cambridge, Scroop, andGrey,
in their dear care
and tender preservation of ourperson,
would have him punished.
And now to our French causes.
Who are the late commissioners?
I one, my lord.
Your Highness bade me ask for ittoday.
So did you me, my liege.
And I, my royal sovereign.
Then, Richard, Earl ofCambridge,
there is yours;
there yours, Lord Scroop ofMasham;
and, Sir Knight Grey ofNorthumberland,
this same is yours.
Read them,
and know I know your worthiness.
My Lord of Westmoreland, UncleExeter,
we will aboard tonight.
Why, how now, gentlemen?
What see you in those papers
that you lose so muchcomplexion?
Look, ye, how they change.
Their cheeks are paper.
Why, what read you there thathave so cowarded
and chased your blood out ofappearance?
I do confess my fault
and do submit me to YourHighness' mercy.
To which we all appeal.
The mercy that was quick in usbut late
by your own counsel issuppressed and killed.
You must not dare, for shame, totalk of mercy,
for your own reasons turn intoyour bosoms,
as dogs upon their masters,worrying you.
See you, my princes and my noblepeers,
these English monsters.
My Lord of Cambridge here,
you know how apt our love was toaccord to furnish him
with all appurtenants belongingto his honor;
and this man hath for a fewlight crowns,
lightly conspired and sworn untothe practices of France
to kill us here in Hampton;
to the which this knight,
no less for bounty bound to usthan Cambridge is,
hath likewise sworn.
But, oh, what shall I say tothee, Lord Scroop?
Thou cruel,
ingrateful,
savage,
and inhuman creature?
Thou that didst bear the key ofall my counsels,
that knew'st the very bottom ofmy soul,
that almost mightst have coin'dme into gold,
wouldst thou have practised onme for thy use?
May it be possible that foreignhire
could out of thee extract onespark of evil
that might annoy my finger?
'Tis so strange that, though thetruth of it
stand off as gross as black andwhite,
my eye will scarcely see it.
Oh, how hast thou with jealousy
infected the sweetness ofaffiance.
Show men dutiful?
Why...
so didst thou.
Seem they grave and learned?
Why...
so didst thou.
Come they of noble family?
Why...
so didst thou.
Seem they religious?
Why...
so didst thou.
And thus, thy fall hath left akind of blot
to mark the full-fraught man andbest indued
with some suspicion.
I will weep for thee,
for this revolt of thine,methinks,
is like another fall of man.
Their faults are open.
Arrest them to the answer of thelaw,
and God acquit them of theirpractices.
Our purposes God justly hathdiscovered,
and I repent my fault more thanmy death,
which I beseech Your Highness toforgive
although my body pay the priceof it.
For me, the gold of France didnot seduce,
although I did admit it as amotive
the sooner to effect what Iintended.
But God be thanked forprevention,
which I in sufferance heartilywill rejoice,
beseeching God and you to pardonme.
Never did faithful subject
more rejoice at the discovery ofmost dangerous treason
than I do at this hour joy o'ermyself,
prevented from a damnedenterprise.
My fault, but not my body,pardon, sovereign.
God quit you in His mercy.
Hear your sentence.
You have conspired against ourroyal person,
joined with an enemy proclaimed,
and from his coffers receivedthe golden earnest of our death,
wherein you would have sold yourking to slaughter,
his princes and his peers toservitude,
his subjects to oppression andcontempt,
and his whole kingdom intodesolation.
Touching our person, seek we norevenge,
but we our kingdom's safety mustso tender,
whose ruin you have sought,
that to her laws we do deliveryou.
Get you therefore hence, poor,miserable wretches,
to your death,
the taste whereof
God of His mercy give youpatience to endure
and true repentance of all yourdear offences.
Bear them hence.
Now, lords, for France,
the enterprise whereof
shall be to you, as us, likeglorious.
We doubt not of a fair and luckywar,
since God so graciously hathbrought to light
this dangerous treason lurkingin our way
to hinder our beginnings.
We doubt not now but every rubis smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear countrymen.
Let us deliver our puissanceinto the hand of God,
putting it straight inexpedition.
Cheerly to sea.
The signs of war advance.
No king of England if not kingof France.
God save the king!
Honey, sweet husband,
let me bring thee to Staines.
No, for my manly heart dothyearn.
Bardolph, be blithe.
Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins.
Boy, bristle thy courage up,
for Falstaff,
he is dead,
and we must yearn therefore.
Would I were with him,wheresome'er he is,
either in heaven or in hell.
Nay, sure, he's not in hell.
He's in Arthur's bosom,
if ever man went to Arthur'sbosom.
A' made a finer end
and went away
an it had been any christomchild.
A' parted even just between12:00 and 1:00,
even at the turning of the tide,
for after I saw him
fumble with the sheets
and play with flowers
and smile upon his fingers'ends,
I knew there was but one way.
For his nose was as sharp as apen,
and a' babbled o' green fields.
"How now, Sir John?" quoth I.
"Come, man.
Be of good cheer."
So a' cried out,
"God,
God, God,"
three or four times.
Now I, to comfort him,
bid him a' should not think ofGod.
I hoped there was no need totrouble himself
with any such thoughts yet.
So a' bade me put more clotheson his feet.
And I put my hand in the bed,and I felt them,
and they were as cold as anystone.
And then I felt up to his knees,
and so upward and upward,
and all was as cold as anystone.
They say he cried out of sack.
Aye, that a' did.
And of women.
Nay, that a' did not.
That a' did, and said they weredevils incarnate.
A' could never abide carnation.
'Twas a color he never liked.
A' said once the devil wouldhave him about women.
A' did in some sorts handlewomen,
but then he was rheumatic
and talked of the whore ofBabylon.
Do you not remember?
A' saw a flea stick uponBardolph's nose
and said it was a black soulburning in hell?
Well, the fuel is gone thatmaintained that fire.
That's all the riches I got inhis service.
Shall we shog?
Yeah, the king will be gone fromSouthampton.
Come, let's away.
My love,
give me thy lips.
Look to my chattels and mymovables.
Go, clear thy crystals.
Yokefellows in arms, let us toFrance,
like horseleeches, my boys,
to suck,
the very blood to suck!
And that's but unwholesome food,they say.
Touch her soft mouth, and march.
Farewell, hostess.
I cannot kiss.
That's the humor of it.
But, adieu.
Let housewifery appear.
Keep close, I thee command!
Farewell.
Farewell!
Adieu.
Thus comes the English with fullpower upon us,
and more than carefully it usconcerns
to answer royally in ourdefenses.
Therefore, the Dukes of Berriand of Bretagne,
of Brabant and Orleans
shall make forth,
and you, Prince Dauphin,
with all swift dispatch
to line and new repair our townsof war
with men of courage and withmeans defendant.
My most redoubted father,
it is most meet we arm us'gainst the foe.
For peace itself should not sodull a kingdom,
though war nor no known quarrelwere in question
but that defenses, musters,preparations
should be maintained, assembled,and collected,
as were a war in expectation.
Therefore, I say, 'tis meet weall go forth
to view the sick and feebleparts of France.
And let us do it with no show offear.
No, with no more than if weheard that England
were busied with a Whitsunmorris dance,
for, my good liege, she is soidly kinged,
her sceptre so fantasticallyborne
by a vain, giddy, shallow,humorous youth,
that fear attends her not.
Oh, peace, Prince Dauphin.
You are too much mistaken inthis king.
Question Your Grace the lateambassadors
with what great state he heardtheir embassy,
how well supplied with noblecounselors,
how modest in exception,
and withal how terrible inconstant resolution,
and you shall find his vanitiesforspent
were but the outside of theRoman Brutus,
covering discretion with a coatof folly.
Well, 'tis not so, my Lord HighConstable,
but though we think it so, it isno matter.
Ah!
In cases of defense,
'tis best to weigh the enemymore mighty than he seems
so the proportions of defenseare filled,
which, of a weak and niggardlyprojection,
doth, like a miser, spoil hiscoat
with scanting a little cloth.
Think we King Harry strong,
and, princes, look you stronglyarm to meet him.
The kindred of him hath beenfleshed upon us,
and he is bred out of thatbloody strain
that haunted us in our familiarpaths.
Witness our too much memorableshame
when CrÈcy battle fatally wasstruck
and all our princes captived
by the hand of that black name,Edward, Black Prince of Wales.
This is a stem of thatvictorious stock,
and let us fear the nativemightiness
and fate of him.
Ambassadors from Harry, King ofEngland,
do crave admittance to YourMajesty.
We'll give them presentaudience.
Your Majesty!
Go, and bring them.
You see, this chase is hotlyfollowed, friends.
Turn head, and stop pursuit,
for coward dogs most spend theirmouths
when what they seem to threatenruns far before them.
Good my sovereign,
take up the English short,
and let them know
of what a monarchy you are thehead.
Self-love, my liege,
is not so vile a sin asself-neglecting.
From our brother of England?
From him,
and thus he greets Your Majesty.
He wills you, in the name of GodAlmighty,
that you divest yourself
and lay apart the borrowedglories
that by gift of heaven,
by law of nature and of nations
'longs to him and to his heirs,
namely the crown--
and all wide-stretched honors
that pertain by custom and theordinance of times
unto the crown of France.
Or else what follows?
Bloody constraint,
for if you hide the crown evenin your hearts,
there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce tempest ishe coming,
in thunder and in earthquake--
like a Jove that, if requiringfail,
he will compel--
and bids you, in the bowels ofthe Lord,
deliver up the crown
and to take mercy on the poorsouls
for whom this hungry war openshis vasty jaws--
and on your head turning thewidows' tears,
the orphans' cries, the deadmen's blood,
the privy maidens' groans
for husbands, fathers, andbetrothed lovers
that shall be swallowed in thiscontroversy.
This is his claim,
his threatening,
and my message.
Unless the dauphin be inpresence here,
to whom expressly I bringgreeting to.
For us, we will consider of thisfurther.
Your Majesty!
Tomorrow shall you bear our fullintent
back to our brother of England.
For the dauphin,
I stand here for him.
What to him from England?
Scorn and defiance,
slight regard, contempt,
and anything
that may not misbecome themighty sender
doth he prize you at.
Say...
if my father render fair return,
it is against my will,
for I desire nothing but oddswith England.
To that end, as matching to hisyouth and vanity,
I did present him with the Parisballs.
He'll make your Paris Louvreshake for it,
were it the mistress court ofmighty Europe.
And be assured, you'll find adifference,
as we his subjects have inwonder found,
between the promise of hisgreener days
and these he masters now.
Now he weighs time even to theutmost grain.
That you shall read in your ownlosses
if he stay in France.
Tomorrow shall you know our mindat full.
Dispatch us with all speed,
lest that our king come herehimself
to question our delay,
for he is footed in this landalready.
You shall be soon dispatchedwith fair conditions.
A night is but small breath andlittle pause
to answer matters of thisconsequence!